README.md, before:

<!-- default badges list -->
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Open_in_DevExpress_Support_Center-FF7200?style=flat-square&logo=DevExpress&logoColor=white)](https://supportcenter.devexpress.com/ticket/details/T1253240)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/📖_How_to_use_DevExpress_Examples-e9f6fc?style=flat-square)](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/403183)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/💬_Leave_Feedback-feecdd?style=flat-square)](#does-this-example-address-your-development-requirementsobjectives)
<!-- default badges end -->
# Reporting for Blazor - Integrate AI-powered Summarize and Translate Features based on Azure OpenAI

This example adds two new buttons that help users to summarize and translate a report content in the Blazor Native Report Viewer with AI-powered functionality:

- **Summarize**: When you click this button, Generative AI summaries generate content that helps you quickly understand/analyze core insights associated with a given report.
- **Translate**: This button helps you translate report documents, chosen pages, or selected content to a desired language with AI-powered translation tools.

![AI-Powered Summarize and Translate Buttons](blazor-reporting-ai-enhancements.png)

## Implementation Details

### Add NuGet Packages

Add the following NuGet packages:
- `DevExpress.AIIntegration.Blazor.Reporting.Viewer`
- `DevExpress.AIIntegration.Azure.OpenAI` or `DevExpress.AIIntegration.OpenAI` based on your AI service preferences.

### Add Personal Keys

You need to create an Azure OpenAI resource in the Azure portal to use AI Assistants for DevExpress Reporting. Refer to the following help topic for details: [Microsoft - Create and deploy an Azure OpenAI Service resource](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/how-to/create-resource?pivots=web-portal).

Once you obtain a private endpoint and an API key, open [appsettings.json](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/appsettings.json) and add `DeploymentName`, `AzureOpenAIKey`, and `AzureOpenAIEndpoint` values to the fields below (`DeploymentName` is a name of your Azure model, for example, `GPT4o`):

```json
"AISettings": {
    "DeploymentName": "GPT4o",
    "AzureOpenAIKey": "",
    "AzureOpenAIEndpoint": ""
}
``` 

Create a class that helps you read these settings:

```cs
public class AISettings {
    public string AzureOpenAIKey { get; set; }
    public string DeploymentName { get; set; }
    public string AzureOpenAIEndpoint { get; set; }
}
```

### Register AI Services

Call the `AddDevExpressAI` method at the application startup to register AI services in your application:

```cs
using DevExpress.AIIntegration;
using DevExpress.AIIntegration.Reporting;
using DevExpress.AIIntegration.Blazor.Reporting.Viewer.Models;
using Azure.AI.OpenAI;
using Azure;
// ...
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var settings = builder.Configuration.GetSection("AISettings").Get<AISettings>();
builder.Services.AddDevExpressAI((config) => {
    config.RegisterChatClientOpenAIService(new AzureOpenAIClient(
        new Uri(settings.AzureOpenAIEndpoint),
        new AzureKeyCredential(settings.AzureOpenAIKey)
        ),settings.DeploymentName);
    config.AddBlazorReportingAIIntegration(config => {
        config.SummarizeBehavior = SummarizeBehavior.Abstractive;
        config.AvailabelLanguages = new List<LanguageItem>() {
            new LanguageItem() { Key = "de", Text = "German" },
            new LanguageItem() { Key = "es", Text = "Spanish" },
            new LanguageItem() { Key = "en", Text = "English" }
        };
    });
});

var app = builder.Build();
```

## Files to Review 

- [Program.cs](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/Program.cs)
- [AISettings.cs](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/Settings/AISettings.cs)
- [appsettings.json](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/appsettings.json)

## More Examples

- [Reporting for ASP.NET Core - Integrate AI Assistant based on Azure OpenAI](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/web-reporting-integrate-ai-assistant/)
- [Rich Text Editor and HTML Editor for Blazor - How to integrate AI-powered extensions](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/blazor-ai-integration-to-text-editors)
- [AI Chat for Blazor - How to add DxAIChat component in Blazor, MAUI, WPF, and WinForms applications](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devexpress-ai-chat-samples)

<!-- feedback -->
## Does this example address your development requirements/objectives?

[<img src="https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/i/yes-button.svg"/>](https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/survey.xml?utm_source=github&utm_campaign=blazor-reporting-ai-summarize-and-translate&~~~was_helpful=yes) [<img src="https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/i/no-button.svg"/>](https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/survey.xml?utm_source=github&utm_campaign=blazor-reporting-ai-summarize-and-translate&~~~was_helpful=no)

(you will be redirected to DevExpress.com to submit your response)
<!-- feedback end -->

Commit message:

Apply suggestions from code review
Co-authored-by: Abadzhev <vladimira@devexpress.com>

README.md, after:

<!-- default badges list -->
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Open_in_DevExpress_Support_Center-FF7200?style=flat-square&logo=DevExpress&logoColor=white)](https://supportcenter.devexpress.com/ticket/details/T1253240)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/📖_How_to_use_DevExpress_Examples-e9f6fc?style=flat-square)](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/403183)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/💬_Leave_Feedback-feecdd?style=flat-square)](#does-this-example-address-your-development-requirementsobjectives)
<!-- default badges end -->
# Reporting for Blazor - Integrate AI-powered Summarize and Translate Features based on Azure OpenAI

This example extends the DevExpress Blazor Report Viewer with AI-based capabilities. These capabilities are available in UI via two buttons that access the report document and process its content as follows:

- **Summarize**: Uses generative AI to summarize report content and help you quickly review core insights associated with this report.
- **Translate**: Uses AI services to translate report content to another language.

The following image shows the application's interface. As you can see, users can process the entire document, individual pages, or selected content. 

![AI-Powered Summarize and Translate Buttons](blazor-reporting-ai-enhancements.png)

## Implementation Details

### Add NuGet Packages

Add the following NuGet packages:
- `DevExpress.AIIntegration.Blazor.Reporting.Viewer`
- `DevExpress.AIIntegration.Azure.OpenAI` or `DevExpress.AIIntegration.OpenAI` based on your AI service preferences. This project uses Azure OpenAI. The remainder of this document describes steps related to this package.  

### Add Personal Keys

To use AI Assistants in your applications, you need to create an Azure OpenAI resource in the Azure portal . Refer to the following help topic for details: [Microsoft - Create and deploy an Azure OpenAI Service resource](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/how-to/create-resource?pivots=web-portal).

Once you obtain a private endpoint and an API key, open [appsettings.json](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/appsettings.json) and specify `DeploymentName`, `AzureOpenAIKey`, and `AzureOpenAIEndpoint` values. Note that `DeploymentName` is  set to `GPT4o`, but you can specify a different model:

```json
"AISettings": {
    "DeploymentName": "GPT4o",
    "AzureOpenAIKey": "",
    "AzureOpenAIEndpoint": ""
}
``` 

Create a class that helps you read these settings:

```cs
public class AISettings {
    public string AzureOpenAIKey { get; set; }
    public string DeploymentName { get; set; }
    public string AzureOpenAIEndpoint { get; set; }
}
```

### Register AI Services

Call the `AddDevExpressAI` method at the application startup to register AI services in your application:

```cs
using DevExpress.AIIntegration;
using DevExpress.AIIntegration.Reporting;
using DevExpress.AIIntegration.Blazor.Reporting.Viewer.Models;
using Azure.AI.OpenAI;
using Azure;
// ...
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var settings = builder.Configuration.GetSection("AISettings").Get<AISettings>();
builder.Services.AddDevExpressAI((config) => {
    config.RegisterChatClientOpenAIService(new AzureOpenAIClient(
        new Uri(settings.AzureOpenAIEndpoint),
        new AzureKeyCredential(settings.AzureOpenAIKey)
        ),settings.DeploymentName);
    config.AddBlazorReportingAIIntegration(config => {
        config.SummarizeBehavior = SummarizeBehavior.Abstractive;
        config.AvailabelLanguages = new List<LanguageItem>() {
            new LanguageItem() { Key = "de", Text = "German" },
            new LanguageItem() { Key = "es", Text = "Spanish" },
            new LanguageItem() { Key = "en", Text = "English" }
        };
    });
});

var app = builder.Build();
```

## Files to Review 

- [Program.cs](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/Program.cs)
- [AISettings.cs](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/Settings/AISettings.cs)
- [appsettings.json](./CS/BlazorReportViewer/appsettings.json)

## More Examples

- [Reporting for ASP.NET Core - Integrate AI Assistant based on Azure OpenAI](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/web-reporting-integrate-ai-assistant/)
- [Rich Text Editor and HTML Editor for Blazor - How to integrate AI-powered extensions](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/blazor-ai-integration-to-text-editors)
- [AI Chat for Blazor - How to add DxAIChat component in Blazor, MAUI, WPF, and WinForms applications](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devexpress-ai-chat-samples)

<!-- feedback -->
## Does this example address your development requirements/objectives?

[<img src="https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/i/yes-button.svg"/>](https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/survey.xml?utm_source=github&utm_campaign=blazor-reporting-ai-summarize-and-translate&~~~was_helpful=yes) [<img src="https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/i/no-button.svg"/>](https://www.devexpress.com/support/examples/survey.xml?utm_source=github&utm_campaign=blazor-reporting-ai-summarize-and-translate&~~~was_helpful=no)

(you will be redirected to DevExpress.com to submit your response)
<!-- feedback end -->
